GOALS:

Create a safe environment where people have freedom to engage in identity exploration.
Should the goal of identity exploration be made explicitly clear to players?

Make it easy to create a new character, easy to experiment, and easy to restart after having made mistakes.

Give players choice; give them the freedom to try anything. Let them forge their own paths. This promotes immersion.

Avoid designing repetitive tasks that can be automated client-side.

Do not launch with insufficient content.

==========

COMMUNITY:

Help PCs foster relationships with each other and build communities. Religions (formal devotion?), guilds, clans...
Shared knowledge, goals, projects, and pressures.
Shared history and future.
Shared property.
Shared "bank accounts."
Shared iconography.
Communication channels private to communities.
Archives.

Community participation should be entirely voluntary. Some players will prefer to remain independent.

Create dependencies between communities (these usually concern resources/economics).

Do not encourage xenophobia or prejudice (it could undermine community).

==========

SKILLS:

Classless/skill based.

Experience points and levels. Leveling awards you skill points, which can be spent to advance individual skills.

Attributes are fixed. They represent innate ability.

Character generation can employ a "pick point" system similar to that of Hero's Quest. p.373-4

Have one pool of points go towards attributes, and an entirely separate pool of points go towards initial skills.

"Warning: don't have skills or attributes that affect how quickly characters learn skills. If you do, players will max them out at the first opportunity." p.367

If a character's crafting skill increases on the basis of use, then players are likely to create many items solely so that their crafting skill will rise, leading to a severe over-production of goods. p.565
Award experience points to crafters when someone buys their goods. p.368

Players who want to craft items must pay dues to a merchants guild. By paying dues, they gain access to the raw materials needed to construct items. The items that a character can craft depend on the character's skills.

Ideally, the same skill system will be applicable for all conceivable skills (crafting, weapon use, spells, etc.).

The skills you implement, and the complexity you assign to each "skill tree," sends a message to players regarding what is most important in your world.

If a skill is considered by nearly all players to be essential, then all characters should be given it automatically. p.362

Players must seek out "trainer" NPCs to learn and improve skills. Most trainers can be found in "schools."
Training should cost money.

Skill learning is an ideal candidate for an activity that players can opt to have their characters undertake while they are offline. (Travel is another.) p.450

==========

PD:

It is more realistic. Therefore, a virtual world with PD is more immersive.
When mobiles are killed, they seize to exist. There is no fiction that can satisfactorily explain why the same does not apply to PCs.

If a character can continue its existence after death, then it clearly hasn't died. Without PD, all PCs are effectively immortal.

A virtual world with PD is more exciting/thrilling.
"If fleeing is not unlikely to succeed and the player base is too small to support gang warfare, an unmoderated world can thrive, and with the vibrancy that's hard to match elsewhere." p.418

"Virtual worlds are about identity; if you can't lose something, you don't value it; therefore, you can never value your identity in a non-PD world as much as you can in a PD world." p.433
"The most compelling reason for having PD is that it makes a virtual world meaningful in its own terms." p.432
"Meaningfulness is the fuel that powers the engine of identity development." p.433

Without PD, there really is no such thing as acts of heroism and courage. The existence of PD allows players to truly put their characters on the line, as well as their nascent identities.
"Acts are only heroic when there is significant, perceived chance of real loss and no easier alternative." p.432
"If everyone is a hero, no one is." p.434

Without PD, one's sense of achievement is diluted. In practical terms, given enough time and common sense, anyone can plod to success and make it to "the end."

Without PD, inevitably the experience of the virtual world slowly becomes increasingly vacuous.

Without PD, the people who are first to positions of power get to keep them.

Without PD, the newbies who arrive at a virtual world which has been ongoing for some time may feel that they can never catch up to those players at the top. If new content is continuously added targeting the top players, then the feelings of these newbies are certainly justified. "The horizon advances at the speed of you approach it." p.427

Without PD, players who stick to the same character will essentially only be able to consume the same content once (or at least from only one angle).

"Keep the incidence of PD low and the awareness of its possibility high." p.424
The actual risk of PD should be generally lower than players estimated to be. It should be "favorably unrealistic."

When a PC dies at the hands of a mobile, the mobile should loot the corpse of all valuable items. p.429

Consider allowing players to appeal to have their character resurrected when they were unable to flee due to lag, bugs, or they were unjustly killed by another PC.
Would it be possible for the server to accurately track client latency during combat?

"If you let PKing become your virtual world's elder game, prepare for the worst." p.425

Implementing PD means accepting the fact that many potential players will stay away, and others will leave when their character dies. PD has a serious image problem.

==========

MISC:

Spell out a code of player conduct. It should be clear to players how they are expected to behave.
"...players have a prevailing attitude that anything the virtual world lets them do, they're allowed to do." p.548
Age, harassment (with special attention to sexual orientation), RP (IC) vs. OOC, PD, PvP, multi-playing, bug abuse, loss of items.
IC communication must always be appropriate for the context of the virtual world. References to reality are not allowed.
Make it clear that by playing your virtual world, players are consenting to PD and PvP.
"Evilness is not a winning strategy."
"Yours is just one way of many to play."

Is multi-playing and allowed? If not, then players need a way to formally retire their character.

Consider what to do when a player tries to "rape" another character. p.553
Consider immediately alerting administrators when any in-game communication includes the word "rape."

Allow some degree of player-created content, but only using in-context methods (which is to say that players cannot be "builders"). p.457-8

Create a history and backstory for the virtual world.

(Returning) players should be able to opt out of all tutorials.

When a player creates a new character, ask them to describe how they discovered CurryMUD (if it's their first time).

Consider giving players the functionality to create their own ad-hoc channels.

Make ASCII art maps available in game. New players should start with a map, along with a short welcome letter (obtainable in the tutorial). Other maps may be available for purchase.

Give players badges for achievements.

Have an in-game newspaper. There should be a way for players to read old newspapers. The newspaper could be produced automatically (as opposed to being written by players).

Have an in-game calendar.

Have in-game mail and BBS. Have a special BBS dedicated to OOC topics.

Recommend that players use an external text editor with spell checking for composing multi-line input.
The MUD could itself check spelling...

Make a library or similar area where players may read, for example, the history and backstory of the virtual world.
A museum-like facility could fill this role. There could be a statue for each race and god, along with a description on a placard. Refer to the Pantheon in "City Sites."

Implement a system for auctioning items.

Intoxicants affect speech, etc.

Make cigars and pipes.

PCs may have pets. Make pet shops where pets are sold.

Have musical instruments. PCs can sing and dance along with the music.

Consider having cursed items that cannot be dropped, given to others, or unequipped.
Make a cursed doll.

Implement, in moderation, "environmental" affects, such as making PCs involuntarily sneeze when in a dusty room.

To sacrifice something (typically a corpse), a PC must have in their possession the holy symbol of a deity. Devotees with the necessary skills may produce holy symbols; holy symbols are readily made available for free at places of worship. New characters may start with the holy symbol of their deity of choice.

Corpses that are not sacrificed may become undead.

Avoid teleportation mechanisms, as they tend to have a devastating effect on virtual world economy.

==========

COMMANDS:

You should be able to use "smell" and "listen" with no arguments. "smell air" could have the same effect as "smell" with no arguments.

When a PC dies, all those who have linked with him/her should be notified.

Encourage players to create aliases (using their MUD clients) for emotes unique to their characters. This will give their characters personality and make them more vibrant.

"roomdesc" to specify a temporary description that appears next to your character's name in the description of your current room.
"roomdesc leaning against the signpost" -> You (leaning against the signpost) / Taro (leaning against the signpost)
Certain commands, such as "sit", will automatically set one's room description.

"chardesc" to specify a supplementary description visible when someone looks at you.
"chardesc his hair is disheveled and his eyes are bloodshot" -> { His hair is disheveled and his eyes are bloodshot. }

"bonus" to give another player a bonus for good RP.

"nickname" to create your own nickname for another PC.

"punch", "kick", and "headbutt" to attack a PC without formally entering combat. These commands may not work with NPCs.

Make a command to get help on known powers/skills.

Make a "razzle dazzle root beer" easter egg.

==========

NETWORK:

Implement MSSP to provide info to MUD crawlers?

MCCP for data compression?

MXP for markup, menus, etc.?

==========

OBJECTS:

Objects have varying degrees of persistence. Some objects, such as starter maps, should disappear after having been left on the ground for some time. Corpses decay...

Objects have wear and tear.

Certain objects (typically those that are a permanent fixture in a room) should not be listed in a room's inventory when a player "look"s.

Have designated places where objects can be destroyed (trash bins).

Players should be able to empty out containers that have liquid inside of them.

Consider not allowing more than one type of liquid to be put in a container at once.

Consider putting seasonal content into the virtual world. Such content could be suggestive of real-world seasonal themes. (This only works if virtual world time progression coincides with that of the real world.)

==========

GEOGRAPHY:

Divide the overall geography into the world, regions (large swaths of territory that have distinct, thematic differences), areas/zones (functional partitions imposed for technical reasons; these often coincide with and fit nicely inside regions), and rooms. The world should be partitioned such that it clusters players.

Where the map ends, consider creating unsurmountable physical boundaries. p.275

The size of the virtual world should be proportionate to the number of players. A rule of thumb is to aim for 40 rooms per player. 20 rooms per player is crowded, while 60 rooms per player is sparse. The actual number of rooms need not coincide with the perceived size of the virtual world.

Provide both verbose and brief descriptions of rooms.

Have "safe" zones/rooms, where PvP is impossible. Temples.

Have at least one area where PCs can fight each other essentially to the death, but instead of actually dying, a defeated player character will instead "surrender." Arenas.

Have special rooms where OOC communication is allowed.

The degree to which movement tires a character should be room specific (probably room *link* specific). In this way, terrain can have an effect on the cost of movement. In addition, the physical distance between two rooms may be arbitrary; however, the distance between rooms should be kept relatively consistent so as to keep players from getting unnecessarily lost.

Believable settlements have access to food and water, nearby building materials, a nonthreatening climate/geology/geography, and a population. Often, settlements are centers of trade and commerce.

Rooms may be either "outside" or "inside".

Make a distinction between day and night. During the night, outside rooms automatically become dark (a light source is required).
The sun rises and sets. Moon(s) become visible.

When PCs enter a dark room from a light one, consider providing the description of the dark room after a few seconds delay, so as to model the time it takes for one's eyes to adjust. p.388

Make weather specific to zones. Weather must be appropriate for the given geography and terrain.

PCs may own property and residences. The construction of a house should take some time, so as to be realistic; however, if it takes too long, players will become impatient.

Make one or more cemeteries. If a PC's body is recovered and taken to a cemetery, it can be buried there, and a gravestone will be generated.

Provide special venues for storytelling.

Make a sewer and/or catacombs beneath a city.

Make an area with ancient reptilian monuments.

Make a divine tree, shaped like a woman (similar to the one in HQ1).

Make a forest where players can forage for mushrooms.

Make underground settlements, perhaps with secret/hidden entrances.

Make settlements built above ground, in trees.

Make an area with hostile cannibals (they might not be human).

==========

ECONOMICS:

Economics is concerned with the allocation of resources.

The more persistent the virtual world is, the greater the need for a formal economy.

Wealth enters the system. This happens when, for example, coin-carrying mobiles are generated, and when new characters are created.
PCs accumulate wealth when, for example, they mine for resources, and then sell them.
Wealth leaves the system when PCs buy items and services from NPCs.

Most virtual world economies are open. In an open system, what enters the system has no effect on what exits it.
(This is not the case in a closed system. In a closed system, as more and more PCs accumulate more and more wealth, the amount of money a PC receives for their deeds falls to compensate. Players will become inclined to hold on to their money until they really need it; thus the economy is headed for a grinding halt. Closed economies will always dry up eventually.)

In a fixed-price economy, the cost of commodities never changes. In such a system, inflation hurts everyone who crafts goods for which fixed-prices pertain.
In a free-market economy, prices fluctuate depending on supply and demand (and inflation, too). Most virtual worlds choose this model for their economy.

The free-market model certainly appears to be more maintainable than the fixed-price model. However, there has yet to be a successful large-scale implementation. It only works if ALL prices are variable. Mobile drops should be variable, too, along with the amount of money that new characters start with. Everything must accommodate for supply, demand, and inflation.

The trick is to give goods rather than cash as rewards. Goods get their value from the free market; therefore their value varies in keeping with supply and demand.

The virtual world is not the real world, however. Players may leave your virtual world, never to come back, when they become frustrated over the fluctuations of the free-market economy. Players are bound to get upset when they spend four hours collecting wolf pelts, only to find that wolf pelts are not nearly worth what they used to be. Virtual worlds must take into account the perceived fulfillment of their players, as players are free to quit a virtual world at any time.

Administrators and live teems may manually control and manipulate the economy, assuming that they really know what they're doing. They need to be ready to deal with accusations of bias and favoritism.

Have items wear out (realistically). This creates a money sink, thereby discouraging inflation. It also helps keep rare items rare.

Consider making certain services available for sale. This works especially well when the service is something that PCs can do for themselves, but players don't enjoy doing.

Consider not having banks, as they are out of place in a pre-Renaissance setting.
The absence of vaults will discourage hoarding.

Charge for PC advancement.

==========

MOBILES:

Every mobile has a speed, which indicates how fast they can move from room to room. Groups travel at the speed of the slowest member.
Naturally, encumbrance affects speed.

==========

PCs:

For players who want to try out the game and start playing quickly, offer "character kits."
Character kits need not correspond to traditional classes. Consider defining kits only after you have designed races and skills.

Make it clear that player descriptions must be written from an objective viewpoint. They must be passive.

Consider giving players the ability to change their character's description at any time.

Perhaps make the composing of a background story/"character essay" an optional endeavor that awards experience points.

Racial languages. PCs can spend points to (magically?) learn extra languages, though it should be difficult to find NPC "trainers" who teach them.

==========

NPCs:

Even rudimentary AI is better than none.

NPCs act even when there are no PCs around. Make it so that this behavior can be disabled (to relieve server load).

Create "lore provider" NPCs designed to dispense knowledge in response to the "ask" command.

Realistically, NPCs should go to bed at night. Certain mobiles should only come out at night.

Ideas for mobiles:
Beastly Fido
Unit Monster and Multibeast
Giant Honey Badgers

==========

COMBAT:

During combat, a PC may manually switch the opponent they attack.
In a combat where there are multiple opponents, a mobile may automatically switch the opponent they attack.

Attempting to flee gives the opponent a free attack.
When fighting more than one mobile, there is a chance you will be unable to flee. The chance to flee could also be contingent upon the number of exits.

==========

SPELLS/PSI:

There is a cool-down period in which another spell cannot be cast.

Some spells can hit more than one mobile.

==========

QUESTIONS:

How can the game be tailored to the visually impaired?
This question is best answered by the actual community of visually impaired players.

To what extent are the actions of PCs allowed to influence the content of the virtual world?
To what extent is the storyline fixed?

Partition PCs geographically? Racial settlements?

Can PCs higher henchmen NPCs to fight with them, heal them, and carry their items?

Profiling? Make this the basis for an auto-generated in-game newspaper? p.185

Boats?

Tour duty?

In what cases do PCs remain active after the player's connection drops?

Doors? (When a door is opened, players on the other side would need to be informed.)
