RUMIA: A Modern History
from [the encyclopedia on Rumia by a human academic from the university in Wyning]

MAP
TODO: This book (section?) should consist primarily of a URL to the map of Rumia.

TIMELINE
(The current year is about 4170.)

The last 200 years have seen a massive increase in international trade. Following a long period of relative peace throughout most of Rumia, three distinct wars broke out, leading to the establishment of Rumia's sole democratic government in Wyning, and the rise of the Brahnian Empire in the East.

3998-4001 (3 years)
The Wyning Civil War.
The humans overthrow the monarchy of King Eston and forge a democratic government seated in Kilagore.

4008
The Lago-Nymphian war.
The lagomorphs annex Shunfalip-mi; the entire archipelago becomes part of Falyncentie.

4071
Felinoid Prince Oleverost leads a fleet of twelve boats on a diplomatic trade mission to Belsula. Ten boats, including that carrying the prince, vanish in the Rasen Vortex; the remaining two boats return to Cloessess unscathed.

4091-4100 (10 years)
The Crimson War.
The vulpenoids under King Brahn III invade Melarue. King Elendar I is overthrown and Melarue becomes a colony of Dolgu, establishing the Brahnian Empire.

4109
The Vulpo-Lago War.
The vulpenoids under King Brahn IV invade Shunfalip-mi. A stalemate is reached following the Battle of Zunbun-mi. The vulpenoids colonize Lopo Lwan-mi and Shonlip-mi, while the lagomorphs retain Zunbun-mi, Kap'lwen-mi, and Unlenbi-mi.

4110
In response to the threat of vulpenoidean imperialism, the humans, hobbits, and felinoids ratify the Treaty of Istin, establishing the League of Kingdoms.

4139-4152 (13 years)
The Umr Epidemic ravages Yurthor.

4150-4160 (10 years)
The Decade of Quakes. Devastating earthquakes occur throughout Dolgu, Shunfalip-mi, and Falyncentie.

-----

SHUNFALIP-MI
from [the encyclopedia on Rumia by a human academic from the university in Wyning]

Geography:
  Shunfalip-mi is an archipelago between Falyncentie to the north and Dolgu to the south. It marks the divide between the Dopgol Ocean to the west and the Orthen Ocean to the east. Its five islands, from southernmost to northernmost, are: Shonlip-mi, Lopo Lwan-mi, Zunbun-mi, Kap'lwen-mi, and Unlenbi-mi. Zunbun-mi is the largest island, while Unlenbi-mi is the smallest.

History:
  Shunfalip-mi is the indigenous home of the nymphs. With little interference from the outside world, the nymphs maintained their hunter-gatherer culture for nearly 4,000 years in relative peace. Nymphian society organized into at least a dozen autonomous tribes, and a single, central government was never established.
  During the third millennium, an increase in trade between the kingdoms to the north and south lead to the creation of a formal trade route along the island chain. Interest in the agricultural products of Shunfalip-mi increased, and many nymphian tribes experienced greater prosperity as a result of engaging in international trade.
  The Lago-Nymphian war broke out in 4008. Motivated by desires to exercise greater control over the trade route and to absorb/monopolize the market for goods originating from Shunfalip-mi, the lagomorphean army launched an invasion from Falyncentie with the goal of annexing the archipelago. The nymphs were highly hindered by a lack of inter-tribal organization, and the lagomorphs were victorious in a matter of months. There were relatively few casualties on either side. Shunfalip-mi officially became part of Falyncentie, and the nymphs likewise became citizens of the lagomorphean kingdom; tribal law was superseded by lagomorphean law.
  During the long and bloody Crimson War between the vulpenoids and elves (4091-4100), the lagomorphs, having long been friendly with the elves, made a limited effort to support them militarily.
Thousands of elven refugees immigrated to Shunfalip-mi, fleeing violence and persecution. Sympathetic to their plight, the lagomorphs made an earnest attempt to accommodate the refugees. To this day there remains a distinct presence of elves on the islands.

the Vulpo-Lago War of 4109
Some dwarves fled Yurthor for Shunfalip-mi to escape the Umr Epidemic.

Demographics:
  Along with increased international trade, various historical factors (highlighted above) have lead to Shunfalip-mi becoming the most racially diverse territory of Rumia. The demographic breakdown of present-day Shunfalip-mi is estimated to be as follows:
45% nymphs
20% lagomorphs
15% vulpenoids
10% elves
5%  dwarves
2%  humans
2%  felinoids
1%  hobbits

Language:
  Given that Shunfalip-mi is racially diverse, it's hardly surprising that many languages are spoken on the islands, and the common tongue is frequently utilized. The vast majority of names given to settlements and geological features come from the naelyni language of the nymphs. Those with a linguistic curiosity will be interested in the meaning of the suffixes that regularly appear in these names. Here are the most common:
"-bi" mountain range
"-ji" river
"-ko" village/settlement
"-mi" island(s)
"-to" lake

Environment:
  Mountain ranges can be found throughout the entire archipelago. A rocky desert zone exists at the geographic center of Shunfalip-mi: Zunbun-mi, the middle island, is almost entirely desert. The southern half of Kap'lwen-mi (north of Zunbun-mi) and the northern tip of Lopo Lwan-mi (south of Zunbun-mi) also feature deserts. The regions to the north and south of the central desert zone consist of tropical savannas. Open and continuous grasslands with scattered trees and shrubs are common, with forests often appearing along rivers and wetlands.

Climate:
  The climate is typically hot, sunny, dry, and somewhat windy all year long. The desert zone is extremely arid and often sweltering, while the climate of the savannas is less extreme. There is a long dry season, and a short wet season during the summer months of Fete Lun and Sun Lun. Rainfall can be unreliable and erratic.

Fauna and flora:
  Shunfalip-mi is home to a wide variety of plants and animals. Plants adapt at storing water are common, including trees, palms, succulents such as cacti, and spiny shrubs. Native animals include antelope, goats, camels, cheetah, lions, lizards, snakes, scorpions, foxes, jackals, rock cavies, and honey badgers. Highly aggressive giant honey badgers exist in some areas (most notably the Uninhabited Zone of Lopo Lwan-mi).

Economy:
  Shunfalip-mi's major exports include nuts (in particular, gorhna nuts), beans, yams, and spices.

-----

LOPO LWAN-MI
from [the encyclopedia on Rumia by a human academic from the university in Wyning]
TODO: This book should include a URL to the map of Lopo Lwan-mi.
