THE BIPEDAL RACES OF RUMIA: An Encyclopedia
[by a human academic from the university in Wyning]

TODO:
Consider including "art" as a topic discussed in the entry for some(?) races.
Abstract modern art movement, including somewhat transgressive performance art, possibly censored by the king.
Perhaps a movement originated by outspoken, liberal, vulpenoidean artists who were protesting the imperialism of the Brahnian Empire (primarily disgruntled, activist artists from vulpenoid families who had immigrated to the two vulpenoid islands of Shunfalip-mi). The king threw them in jail, but the art movement inspired liberal human artists in Wyning to start their own movement exploring abstract art, particularly in painting.

Make a book of nymphian poetry translated from naelyni into the common tongue by a poet (race of poet?).

Belsula (hobbits)
kingdom: King Morton
capital: Gamwich

Cloessess (felinoids)
kingdom: King Deltheru
capital: Echdel

Dolgu (vulpenoids)
empire: Emperor Brahn
capital: Aldos

Falyncentie and Emiai (lagomorphs)
kingdom: King Threis
capital: Llar

Melarue (elves)
colony of the Brahnian Empire (elf king: King Elendar II)
capital: Idril

Shunfalip-mi (nymphs)
Unlenbi-mi, Kap'lwen-mi, and Zunbun-mi islands are part of Falyncentie
Lopo Lwan-mi and Shonlip-mi islands are colonies of the Brahnian Empire

Wyning (humans)
democracy: Premier Taran
capital: Kilagore

Yurthor (dwarves)
kingdom: King Orrik
capital: Zirak

-----

HUMANS
from [the name of the encyclopedia]

Education has flourished under the human democracy in Wyning. There is a famous university in Kilagore where students are offered a liberal, high-level education. The world's leading academics (human men) teach and research there.

-----

VULPENOIDS
from [the name of the encyclopedia]

Vulpenoids (young men) born in Dolgu are subjected to mandatory conscription into the Imperial Army for 5(?) years.
Vulpenoid young men born in the colonies ("second generation?") are exceptions to the rule. The emperor explicitly designed this loophole to encourage young adults to immigrate to the colonies and establish families there.
